Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
here. I have a very special guest, Doctor Carl
Freston. He is Professor of Imaging Neuroscience and welcome
principal research fellow of Imaging Neuroscience at University College
London. He is a theoretical neuroscientist and his main
contribution to theoretical neurobiology has been a free energy
principle for action and perception. And today we're going
to focus a lot on the free energy principle.
And let's say what point we can get to
because there are many topics that Doctor Freston researchers
that, that I would be interested in talking with
him about about today. But let's see where we
can get. So, Doctor Frisson, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to have everyone.
Thank you very much for inviting me. It's a
great pleasure to be here.
OK. So the free energy principle, first of all,
could you tell us in the simplest terms possible?
What is, what the free energy principle is about?
And could you tell us perhaps also a little
bit about uh the history behind its development?
Yes, the free energy principle is in effect the
physics backstory to um a move in cognitive neuroscience
towards understanding brain function in terms of predictive predictive
processing and specifically the way in which we actively
get information to process and to predict. Um AND
that's sometimes in my world referred to as active
inference. So the free energy principle is the physicists
or the mathematicians foundation from which you can build
a story about how we make sense of our
world. And I repeat how we actively engage with
the world to get the right kinds of sensations
to make sense of our world.
So when applied to, for example, perception and cognition,
you call it active inference is that it
Yeah, absolutely. So active inference which um I read
as synonymous with predictive processing provided there's an active
and embodied aspect to uh predictive processing. Um IS
an application of the free energy principle. Um SOMETIMES
in explaining the free energy principle, um one can
take a low road or a high road and
by the low road and the high road, I
mean a an intuitive um theological account of what,
what it means to engage in active inference and
predictive processing um where the the high road will
be the physicists way of telling exactly the same
story. So um you, you asked for a simple
explanation, so perhaps I'll go for the uh the
low road explanation um which I think he could
probably um start with the ideas of Plato and
and his students in terms of um the Allegorical
Cave. Um BUT perhaps best developed by um Herman
Helmholtz, predicated on his understanding of not only physics,
but of course, um perception in the brain as
an anatomist and physiologist, possibly predicated on the ideas
of Kant that were prevalent at that time. So
this um if we start with um Helmholtz and
his notion of unconscious inference, the idea here is
that we make sense of the world by internally
generating a hypothesis, an explanation in our head that
could best account for the sensory impressions on our
ears, on, on our eyes and all our sensory
epithelia. So as Andy Clark puts it where turning
the usual conception of perception on its head. So
in the 20th century, people thought that perception was
basically an outside in process. So sensory information impressed
itself upon the sensory organs that was registered by
the brain. And somehow this sensory information provided was
successively refined and then provided the basis for perception.
The predictive processing or active inference story is exactly
the other way around. The perception rests upon an
inside out process that you are actively and constructively
generating hypotheses. Explanations. Sometimes you can think of these
as hallucinations or fantasies that are fit for purpose
in terms of explaining what I am actually encountering
and perhaps the best way of understanding that would
be through the lens of predictive coding. So, predictive
coding is a scheme in fact, originally invented to
compress sound files in the 19 fifties. But more
recently, over the past few decades, it has become
a very popular scheme for understanding how the brain
works in terms of message passing and technically belief,
updating. And it's very simple. All that happens is
that if I had an idea or a hypothesis
about the cause of this pattern of visual input,
say it was you and your face that I
would be able to predict what I would see
if I was right. And I can compare my
prediction to what I'm actually sensing. So if I
am correct, then there should be no difference between
my prediction and my sensations. And that difference is
scored by a prediction error. So if I can
eliminate or resolve prediction errors, I've got the right
explanation for states of affairs in the world out
there. And when I say out there, what I,
what I'm implying is that the brain can't, doesn't
have direct access to the world. It can only
sample it all it has access to are very
sparse sensory signals afforded by our eyes, our ears,
our skin and our body, all our all our
sense organs. So this picture puts prediction error at
the center of driving changes in our beliefs. So
if we have a large prediction error, that basically
means our perception, our belief, I should qualify this.
When I say belief, I mean a mathematical belief,
a representation. If you like an encoding of the
cause of a sensation by some neuronal uh activity.
So if I have a belief that is not
able to predict what I'm currently seeing, I can
now use that prediction error to change my mind
to. So using the prediction error, the prediction error
will drive belief updating until it eliminates itself. And
this can be um described in many ways but
has a very nice description in relation to the
wiring in the brain. And in particular, the sort
of hierarchical structure of our brains where there is
recurrent message passing or um or influences between successive
levels of a hierarchical brain, very much like say
an onion. If you imagine the brain being an
onion and the surface is in receipt of all
the sensory impressions. But there are layers upon layers
and layers, literally giving you a very deep structure
and deep is used exactly in the sense of
deep learning. For example, in machine learning, it's the
hierarchical depth that is implied by this steepness. And
in the brain, there are connections between one level
and a deeper level, which suggests that we can
understand these reciprocal or recurrent connections in terms of
prediction errors being passed from a low level to
a deeper level or a higher level, changing the
beliefs. So that the recurrent or the inside out
connections now convey the predictions that are the result
of my belief updating and the predictions come back
down again. They are compared with the input from
the lower levels get the prediction error and then
that was sent forward. So you have this view
of recurrent message passing in the brain where at
each level you are trying to minimize the prediction
error. And if you can do that in a
hierarchical context, then you've got an apt description of
the state of the world at multiple levels of
abstraction, all driven by these ascending messages ascending deep
into the hierarchy that can be construed as prediction
errors. So that's if you like the sort of
I I mentioned sort of a teen explanation. So
the one concern, the objective of the brain is
to make sense of the world by finding an
appropriate explanation for everything that it is currently sensing.
Um And if you take that view and generalize
it to um the consequences of action, you can
now tell a story whereby some of the things
that you're predicting some of the sensations you're predicting
are basically reporting the state of your, your body.
And this can be in two flavors. It can
either be um in terms of the state of
your muscles, you know, physically where your limbs are
and how the degree to which various muscles are
stretched, or it could be um more autonomic, you
know. So we can only really affect the world
in one of two ways. We can only act
upon the world in one or two ways. We
can either move a muscle, um striated muscle would
be those muscles that we can move, volitionally. Um
OR smooth muscle means that we can secrete things
or the kind of muscles we find in the
heart or the gut. But they're both in essence,
providing the brain with signals about the state of
the motor system, sometimes known as the motor plant.
So notice if I've now got a good prediction
of what's happening in the world that includes a
prediction of what I should feel my muscles and
my autonomic nervous system doing. I can then use
that prediction to basically realize or make that prediction
come true. And that's um effectively equipping a predictive
coding scheme with reflexes. So this this perspective on
active sensing, active prediction, um active inference um can
be told in many different ways. For example, um
in robotics, it would be model predictive control. If
you were a motor physiologist, you might describe it
in terms of the equilibrium point hypothesis that some
people like perceptual control theory. The idea is that
you specify you predict the state of your body
and then you reflexively fulfill those predictions. And that
now takes you beyond this perception, but now subsumes
action under this generic imperative to minimize prediction error.
And that is one way of understanding um perception
and action within the same frame. And then you
can sort of add cognition on that and that
all this perception has to be contextualized. You have
to attend to various things, you have to have
the history um of things that have just happened
and also crucially roll out into the future. It's
certainly if you want to make predictions about your
um your behavior that unfolds in terms of policies
and plans and narratives of your, what's going to
happen to me, what should I do? Um Given
I have some predictions about the consequences of acting
in this way, uh act or acting in that
way. And the link to the free energy principle
is that roughly speaking, the total amount of prediction
error can be regarded as free energy from the
point of view of a theorist um um an
information theorist or a physicist. So the free energy
of the free energy principle is effectively scoring the
prediction er the overall prediction error or the implausibility
that if I was right, if my model of
the world as it is at the moment was
correct, then I'm going to want to um that
if it was correct, then the probability of getting
these sensory data will be very high and the
free energy scores a negative log probability of, of
um of, of these data given a particular model
of those data um sometimes known as surprise. So
you can see immediately that sort of prediction error
scores also or reflects the surprise. Technically, uh surprisal.
Again, if you're doing information theory, the mathematical description
of this is called self information. And that's important
because from the point of view of the physicist
to thinking about self organizing systems, like you and
me, but also like um macro molecules and viruses
possibly even to biospheres. Then the minimization of prediction
error means the minimization of surprise, which means the
minimization of self information. And the key thing here
is that the average of the self information is
also known as entropy, which means that self-organization of
this inactive sort where the system is actually acting
upon the world to realize its predictions, or basically
means you're resisting um the natural tendency of systems
to increase in their entropy, to decay, to dissipate,
to die, um to become more disordered. So things
that self organize according to the free energy principle
resist this entropic erosion. If you are a physiologist,
it's just a statement of homeostasis. It just means
that I've got certain predictions that I should be
say at a particular temperature. And if I sense
that my temperature is deviating from these predictions, then
that is surprising in a non propositional sense. Um
It entails a prediction error because the, you know,
my prediction and my sensation are now not in
accord. And if I now act in a way
to eliminate that prediction error, I will act in
a way that brings my temperature back towards my
preferred, my preferred homeostatic set point. So there are
lots of ways of telling this story depending upon
whether you're a physiologist or whether you're an economist
or, you know, a mythologist. But they all basically
speak to the importance of having a model of
the world that prescribes certain behaviors so that you
can sample the world so that everything is unsurprising
from your point of view, given the kind of
thing that you are. Uh I'll just conclude with
a couple of um a couple of key points.
I'm talking about a model uh very um deliberately
because at the heart of this is the notion
of a generative model that can generate the predictions.
Um So this um this perspective um places center
stage, the notion of an agent or anything that
has some kind of sentient behavior. Um It means
that you can always describe the behavior of this
kind of thing in terms of the agent or
the system, having a generative model that can generate
predictions which it actively pursues and and tries to
uh and tries to fulfill. So, you know, the
notion of a generative model brings us exactly back
to the low road discussion um in the sense
that I have models hypotheses, explanations in my mind
that I'm actively revising through this process of basing
belief, updating another way of describing this. Um um
IN order to realize my predictions, given my model
of the world that effectively I am, you know,
everything that defines my characteristics, sensations and exchange with
the world can be described as a generative model.
The final point just to explain why people might,
terms of people might come across if they read
this literature, particularly the philos philosophical literature. It so
happens that that's surprise that self information um which
mathematically is a negative logarithm of the probability of
my sensory data given my model or given me
um is also known as the negative log evidence.
And the evidence is the evidence for your model
of the world, which means you can describe active
inference and this active sampling of the data to
minimize free energy or prediction error as exactly the
same as gathering evidence for your model of the
world sometimes refer to as self evidencing. So that's
something that Jacob Hai has promoted, which I think
is a very neat summary of this kind of
explanation. We're just in the game of gathering evidence
for our model of the lived or possibly sensed
world.
Mhm No, it is a great summary. And before
we delve deeper into the cognitive science and the
neuroscience of it, because there are also a few
concepts, there are terms that you use that I
would like you to uh explain a little bit
better. Like for example, generative model, autonomous states, hierarchical
organization. Before we get into all of that, let's
go step by step here. So one concept that
I would like you to explain to people who
are not familiar with the free energy principle is
what are Markov blankets?
That was the one thing that I didn't include
in my long, long, well spotted, right? So the
physics um um story, the free energy principle has
to derive the self evidencing. I've just described the
predictive pressing I have just described from first principles.
So how does, how does one do that? Um
It's relatively straightforward, although it does involve um um
some esoteric maths if you're not, if you're not
uh a physicist. Uh BUT the arguments are quite
straightforward. THE, you f you basically start by asking
the question, if you want to talk about self-organization,
what is a self? And that's quite a deep
question. So the first thing you realize is that
you have to be able to mathematically in a,
in a principled way, individuate the states of the
self from everything else that is not the self.
How would you do that? Well, as a physicist,
you can't assume that the self is closed. So
you can't assume the kind of physics that you
would have been taught at school where there is
an equilibrium in a closed system. So for example,
the second law of thermodynamics only applies to closed
systems where there is no openness of the self,
to the environment, to the eco niche um to
other selves. So we are now talking about the
physics of open systems. And in so doing, we
have to now distinguish the states of a self
or anything, anything basically from everything else or nothing.
And that's where the Markov blanket comes into play.
So the Markov blanket is a set of states
that intervene between the states that are internal to
let's call it an agent. It could be anything,
it could be any self, let's call it, call
it an agent, but it could be a particle,
it could be a person, it could be a
population, but we'll call it an agent. So the
Markov blanket is a way of drawing a boundary
around the states that are internal to the agent
that separates the internal states from the external states.
And the external states are now the environment and
the Markov blanket very much in the same way
that we talked about before that the brain is
in the darkness of the skull and only has
access to the environment through the sensory impressions. So
the Markov blanket contains all the sensory impressions that
the external states provide on the blanket. These are
sensations and then those sensory states that are part
of the boundary of the blanket then affect the
intern states in the neuronal activity. But the Markov
blanket also contains those states that mediate the influence
of the inside on the outside and they refer
to as active states. So you've got this notion
that there's a set of states, the internal states
say my brain, I've got my external states, the
rest of the universe. And then there are the
boundary or the blanket states. This is a Markov
blanket and they are split into two and the
sensory states mediate the effects of the outside on
the inside and the active states mediate the effects
of the inside on the outside. So this is
the physics and the Markov blanket has a very
particular definition. It simply means that the the um
the sensory states cannot be influenced by the internal
states and the active states cannot be influenced by
the external states. So let me try and make
that even simpler. Um If you were a systems
theorist, you would define any given system. So now
our agent is now a system um in terms
of its inputs and outputs and the active and
sensory states are just the outputs and the inputs
of a particular system. So it's a way of
defining a system or an agent in terms of
its relationship to everything else through its inputs and
outputs. And the Markov blanket condition requires that the
inputs to a system cannot be affected by the
system that is being into which the inputs are
being supplied. Similarly, the outputs of a system can't
be influenced by the, by the external states that
are receiving that output. And with that very, very
simple rule or definition of some thing, an agent
or a system. Um IN terms of Markov blankets,
you can then show that there is always a
description of the observable aspects of the system which
are just the uh the blanket state. So you
can never see inside you observing me means that
all you can see are my blanket states, my
surface, my boundary. Uh And usually you can only
see the consequences of my, of my action. Um
So given those, um given those um uh those
conditions and the existence of a Markov blanket, um
it is then fairly straightforward to show mathematically that
the internal states and the active states have to
minimize free energy if this system has some characteristic
states and it has to have characteristic states, otherwise
it wouldn't have a markoff blanket. So what you're
saying is that anything that exists in the sense
of possessing a Markov blanket or a boundary that
persists over a certain amount of time can always
be described as self evidencing, can always be described
as if it is engaging in some kind of
active infant sense making and acting on the basis
of, of that sense making. So the mark of
black is absolutely crucial because that's where the story
starts really. And it also it takes you beyond
um physics as we know and love it. Um
IN the sense that um this description of the
dynamics of something or an agent is in terms
of the, the internal states holding mathematical or probabilistic
beliefs about external states. This is quite unique to
the free energy principle. Normally, when people talk about
probability distributions, they are talking about a probability distribution
over some states. When you're, when you're talking about
um the free energy principle and what some people
refer to as the basing mechanics that ensues you're
talking now truly about um beliefs encoded by the
internal states about something. So it's information beyond Shannon,
it's, you know, it's truly representational beliefs. And I
introduced the notion of basing mechanics because um just
to reassure you that the maths that underwrites the
basic mechanics um is exactly the same maths that
you will find in quantum mechanics in statistical mechanics.
And in classical mechanics, it's all the same maths.
The only difference um or the only special thing
required by the basing mechanics is the existence of,
of this separation. Uh The Markov blanket that separates
the states of something from the states that are
not part of, of the thing in question.
And is it possible to determine precisely where the
boundary or the mark of blanket is located and
how we separate internal states from external states?
Yes. Uh YOU know, with, with a formal and
um um mathematically crisp definition. Yes, it is. So
um um you and there are if you like
numerical um studies illustrating, how you can identify markoff
blankets, given some data. Um I have colleagues um
um in academia and in industry working on Markov
blanket discovery algorithms. Um So it certainly is possible
and what you're basically looking for is um an
absence of, of influence or coupling that it's this
sparsity um that emerges from, oh sorry, that underpins
Marko blankets. And interestingly in um some work by,
by my friend Dalton shows that for any um
technically any random uh random dynamical system with sparse
coupling, there will always be with probability 11 or
more markoff blankets in any system. So, you know,
these are not remarkable things, you know, it can
be no, the way for any random, you know,
any random dynamical system that has um that persists
it doesn't sort of diverge exponentially into nothing as
long as it persists and has technically what's called
a pull back a tractor, then you will have
markoff blankets having said that um you have to
pick the scale and the internal states to define
the Markov blanket. So there's not one Markov blanket,
there are possibly uncountable, countably large number of Markov
blankets and you can have Markov blankets within Markov
blankets. You can have Markov blankets of Markov blankets.
So you, you have to, if you actually wanted
to identify a Markov blanket and there are lots
of good reasons why you might want to do
that. You really have to specify the scale at
which you are doing it. So if you were
a molecular biologist, the Markov blanket or a cellular
biologist, you might draw a Markov blanket around a
particular cell of interest. If you were a cognitive
neuroscientist, you might draw it around the brain. If
you were a theoretical biologist interested in evolution, you
might draw it around a species. If you were
doing climate change, you might draw it around certain
aspects of the biosphere. So uh and each one
of these Markov blankets would, would contextualize all the,
all the smaller Markov blankets within it and at
different scales. So I I'm trying to emphasize there
is no wrong Markov blanket. But as soon as
you identify some thing, then it must, by definition
have a markoff blanket. So if it is a
natural kind, then it must have a Markov blanket
just to describe it. So a cell has a
markoff blanket. Um A organ has a markoff blanket,
a set of organs, a phenotype has a markoff
blanket. A family has a markoff blanket, a community,
a population, they all have their inputs and outputs.
And I repeat because you've got a very precise
specification of what it means how you define the
Markov blanket. All you have to do is to
identify the sparse coupling. You just have to identify
what is not influenced by what. And once you've
done that, there are easy mathematical recipes for identifying
the Markov blanket just for your entertainment. Um The
the Marko blanket of any given state or set
of states is effectively the parents of by which
I mean, those things that influence the parents of
your internal states, the Children, which are your active
states, the things that you influence in the things
that the internal states influence and the parents of
the Children. So, if you think about the the
two rules, I said that the sensory states cannot
be influenced by the internal states and the active
states cannot be influenced by the external states. Then
the complete set of parents and Children and parents
of the Children are just the blanket state. It
is sensitive based on the active states. So you
can identify that using matrix algebra and dynamical systems
theory. Um OR you can infer that by using
Markov blanket discovery algorithms.
Mhm But there's a bidirectional interaction between the internal
states and the external states.
Correct. Absolutely. And, and that, I mean that that
is a key construct uh that the Markov blanket
uh brings to the table, you've got this sort
of um boundary that allows you to say no,
these are the states of the agent or the
system in question. And these are the state of
the environment um or the external states, but they
are uh bidirectionally coupled. So the system is vicariously
open to everything else, but only through this two
way street, which is the Markov blanket. And you
know, and that reciprocal aspect that you you foregrounded
there is really important. And that's just why I
made such a big point about saying there are
sensory and active parts of the Markov blanket sometimes
referred to as sectors. Um And I say that
because the, you know, you can think of the
Markov blanket in terms of inputs and outputs. Um
But you can also um apply quantum information theory.
Um And people like chris fields have done this
and then the Markov blanket becomes something known as
a holographic screen. And the holographic principle says that
all the information that is accessible um from an
observer from the outside about the internal states on
the other side of the holographic screen is available
on the holographic screen. So that's all, that's what
I was intimating before. When I, you know, when
I'm looking at you, I'm basically looking at your
Markov blanket or your holographic screen at the scale
that you know that we are actually communicating.
So if we want to talk about causality here,
would there be a circular causality between the internal
states and the external states? Is that it?
Yes. Yeah, that, that, that, that is another really
important point. Yes. Um So, first of all, just
to be very clear and precise about um causal
causality in this framework. Um So this framework, the
three principle always stays very close to the physics.
So causality here is very, very clear. It is
basically the influence of one state on another state
that is expressed in time, usually expressed in terms
of a stochastic differential equation, which would be one
way of writing down a random dynamical system such
as I say a long random system. So we're
using causality in a mathematical sense. Um um THAT
could also be read as in a controlled theoretic
sense I cause changes in you simply by having
an influence on you. So is that causal structure
that defines the Markov blanket? Now notice there is
another whole universe of causality which does not rest
upon control theory or dynamical systems theory or random
dynamical systems. Um You know, the French principle is
not interested in that kind of causality. It's just
interested in exactly the kind of causality that underwrites
the uh the market blanket. And simply because we've
got these bidirectional influences causal inferences, you're absolutely right.
There's c causality and that circular causality just as
the action perception cycle. And that becomes really important
when you think about two agents or an ensemble
of agents all communicating with each other or coupled
through their own bound markoff boundaries or markoff blankets
with each other, no one system causes the others,
they all cause each other. Uh And you even
see that uh within the o let's take, let's
come back to this notion of the brain as
a hierarchical generative model. Then the hierarchies are defined
by their Markov blankets. So you've got nested Markov
blankets in the brain. And we were saying before
that one functional architecture that is um necessary, not
that is necessary in terms of the Markov banker,
but also necessary to understand the predicted coding is
the sort of they are sending and descending messages,
predictions and prediction errors. So again, you know, you've
got circular causality. Does the prediction cause a prediction
error or does the prediction revise your prediction. So
circular circular causality wherever you look.
Mhm Perhaps this is a good point to introduce.
Then another concept, what is an autonomous state,
an autonomous state in the context of a Markov
blanket partition is just a description of those states
that can be described as minimizing free energy and
very simply they are just the internal states and
the active states. So mathematically, um it's just those
states, those subset, those states of a particular agent
um that can be described as if they are
minimizing prediction error or free energy. So the nice
thing about having that split of autonomous states into
internal states and active states, then you can say
that it must be the case that the internal
states are minimizing free energy. So it looks as
if they are minimizing their prediction. So it looks
as if they are doing perception while the active
states which are the other part of the autonomous
states um are also minimizing exactly the same quantity
which is the prediction error. But in this instance,
in the productions of the felt body, technically the
proprioceptive or inceptive um uh predictions. And of course,
that's just action. So again, you've got a nice
if you like a common framework or a first
principle account that ties together action and perception through
a common application of the free energy principle to,
to those states to which the free energy principle
applies, which are just the internal states and the
active states. So notice the sensory states don't do
that. The sensory states don't minimize prediction error because
they are influenced by the external states. But the
active states by construction are only influenced, they are
not influenced by the external states and the internal
states are not influenced directly by the external states
because they are hidden behind or sequestered by the
Markov blanket. So the autonomous states, the active states
and the internal states are unique in the sense
that they are not directly influenced or caused by
external states. And that's, you know, that then um
leads you to this interpretation in terms of inference,
in terms of, you know, the internal states holding
beliefs about the external states and using those beliefs
to predict how they're going to act, act upon
the world.
Mhm You've already explained here more or less how
this framework might apply to different kinds of systems.
But how do we get to living systems? I
mean, what is the difference between a living system
and the nonliving system?
Um Yeah, that's an excellent question. Um I think
probably best tackled from the point of view, the
free energy principle. Um So you've got this um
this description of any kind of particle, any kind
of thing um in terms of its markoff blanket
partition. Now that means that there are different kinds
of things. And your question I think is at
what point would you call this particle living or
biotic? And at which point would it um take
on the um the attribute that would associate with
agency and possibly sentience? Um So we just work
through it again, it's relatively straightforward. So we can
have things where the mark where the active sector
of the markoff blanket is empty. So we're talking
about things that cannot act upon the world, they
can still sense the world, they can still be
affected by the universe, but they can't act. So,
you know, one might imagine a rock on the
moon, for example, or something that, that, that does
not have the um does not have a full
complement of autonomous states in the sense that if
the autonomous states are the internal states and the
active states, if they don't have the active states,
they can't move. So you wouldn't call these kinds
of inert systems or inert particles. Um um Living,
would you call them uh living if they were
able to move basically um active states that express
themselves by acting upon the environment? We were just
talking about things that move effectively in a, in
a classical uh context. Um AND things that move
in a way that depends on and only on
the internal states and not the external states. So
there will be another definition of autonomous dynamics. Then
I think you're probably getting closer to biological self-organization
or biotic self-organization. Uh Is it living um at
this point, um probably not there, there's an extra
uh if you like condition that you would probably
want to apply before you would say that this
is biotic or biological uh self organization. And that
is the precision or the reproducibility of the movement.
So, if something is very, very small, it usually
comes along with lots of random fluctuations. So usually
things fluctuate very quickly. They have a higher temperature
from the point of view of cis mechanics. When
they are very, very small. And in the limit
of quantum uh physics, it's all uh it's all
random effectively um or occurring so quickly, you can't
measure it. So you can only describe it in
terms of probability distributions. Um But living things have
characteristic states that they keep on revisiting that you
can recognize um you know, when um in, you
know, in a life form simply because um there
is some systematic revisiting of certain states. And that
tells you two things about self-organization of biological, of
a biological sort or a living sort. It tells
you that they have to be realized in systems
that are sufficiently large for the random fluctuations to
be averaged away. So you won't find living things
at the quantum level. Um But you may find
it at the level of um say a virus
and you'll certainly find it at the level of
a cell as you get to sort of, you
know, hundreds of microns or you know, even millimeters.
Uh AND when you get to something, our size,
then if something, our size moves around of its
own accord because it, it has active states that
are driven by turn. So you'll say yes, that
that is certainly living. Um So size really does
matter. The scale really does matter, I think. Um
And the reason that scale is so important is
as things get bigger, all the random fluctuations disappear
and things get much more precise in terms of
their dynamics that flowed. But the other interesting aspect
of this and interestingly um this inherits from the
physics work of Helmholtz when he was trying to
understand the flow of systems, say for example, turbulence
in water. Um YOU know, is there any way
that you can sort of classify the dynamics of
the flow or the movement of states in some
state in some abstract state space? And the Helmholtz
decomposition says yes, you can divide things into those
flows that try to minimize their energy. And for
our invasive mechanics, this is the variation of free
energy in classical mechanics. It would be things like
gravity in thermodynamics. It would be things like a
potential potential energy. So systems can be described in
terms of their flows, you know, so I'm using
flows and dynamics interchangeably here. So and the flow
can be split into two parts. The first part
is known as a dissipative flow. And it's that
which can be described as flowing downhill, like literally
water flowing um flowing down a valley or down
a potential gradient. And that dissipative um aspect underwrites.
Um A lot of cis mechanics in terms of
fluctuation dissipation theorems. Uh um um uh AND a
lot of the rhetoric surrounding c mechanics like heat
and work all speaks to the way in which
heat is dissipated or work with work due to
this kind of flow. There's another kind of flow.
So if you imagine a valley and you've got
flows down the valley and these flows are equipped
with random fluctuation, so you never settle at the
bottom of the valley. You, you, you um uh
because as soon as you get there, there will
be some random fluctuation that pushes you away. So
there'll be a little um a little regime at
the bottom of the valley that every you have
flown down into and then you're perturbed by the
random fluctuations that's thermodynamic equilibrium. And that will be
the dissipative physics that you know, the statistical mechanics
is based on. But there's another really important kind
of flow which emerges in non equilibrium systems. Um
And that's flow around the iso contours around the
rim or any given level of the bowl. So
this conserves the energy or the height of the
bowl. So it's called conservative uh mechanics. Um And
um this is really important. So in the limit
that things get very, very, very, very big, the
random fluctuations are almost zero. And so what do
you see, you just see this conservative flow, like
for example, the motion of a heavenly body like
the moon orbits. Now, these things have a certain
aspect which brings us back to um what we're
talking about for in terms of biological self-organization, which
is revisiting states that you were once in characteristic
states that you sometimes wander away from um with
an itinerant trajectory, but you always come back again.
Um So in the limit of being very, very
big, much bigger than you and me, uh then,
then we now conform to conservative mechanics and we
have this c this circular flow. This is sometimes
a solenoid flow as well. And you can read
about that if you look at you know basic
descriptions of things like fluid, fluid mechanics. But that
decomposition or variance of it holds for any kind
of state including the states that comprise the Markov
blanket partition into internal blanket states and external states.
And this is so this is to my mind
is so important because what it says is if
the random fluctuations are sufficiently small that I can
see the steroidal flow, what that means is things
of a certain scale will always revisit states that
they were once in. And then you just think
about this at different scales. What you are talking
about is either very, very fast oscillations, for example,
in your brain cells or they could be the
cardiac cycle going around these um itinerant orbits just
like the move but much more complicated now and
uh slightly fuzzy because you're sufficiently small um to
actually have random fluctuations there. Um It could be
walking or it could be by sleep weight cycle.
It could in fact be reproduction or replication at
an evolutionary scale. At every scale, you've got this
characteristic solenoid dynamics, this conservative aspect that I think
is definitive of biological self-organization. So essentially things that
have biorhythms and life cycles. Um MEAN that um
well put it another way, if um biological, if
living things have evinced spy RMS and life cycles,
then that means that they must belong to a
certain class of um things at a particular scale,
they have to be bigger than the quantum scale,
but to be sufficiently itinerant, um they have to
be smaller than the, you know, the, the cosmological
scale you we can go on if you wanted
to, you know, there are, there are, there's one
final um kind of thing that has this um
this um conservative aspect, um the solenoid um um
aspect to it. And that's when the dynamics become
very, very precise. Um WHICH means that you can
effectively roll out into the future. And if you
can run out into the future, that means not
only can you predict the state at the moment
that um um this um uh this system is
in but the long term future And if the
uh if you can predict the long term future,
it will look as though certain kinds of things
like you may plan into the future we have
intentions. And I think now we're now getting very
close to um life forms with agency. Um So,
you know, to uh cut a long story short.
Um um So the answer to your question is
yes, there are certainly different kinds of physical systems
uh at different scales with different degrees of random
fluctuations um and different kinds of dynamics. Um And
I would posit that life is basically um uh
a special kind of thing. Um THAT would subsume
things that are um properly a gent in the
sense that they plan and some things that are
not, I don't think viruses plan. Um Whereas I
do think, say b is a new, you and
I plan into the future. Um And, but we
are quite special. We're in a goldilocks regime between
being very, very small and being very, very big.
So would this framework help us deal with the,
with questions surrounding what separates exactly the organic from
the inorganic and particular kinds of entities like viruses?
Because viruses in particularly are very people debate a
lot about whether they are living systems or nonliving
systems,
right? Yeah. Um I mean, you could certainly use
this framework um to happily accommodate the vagueness and
I'm using vagueness now in a philosophical sense. Yeah.
How many grains of sand, make a pile of
sand. So at what point would a virus be
called living when it was sufficiently big or complicated?
You can certainly locate a vague notion of um,
living versus nonliving. Um And even to, uh I
think to a certain extent agents versus non agents
or sentient, but versus non agent on, on this
space afforded by, um, the, the Markov blanket and
implicitly the free Engine principle. Absolutely. Uh You know,
could you draw bright lines um between, um you
know, is, I think you possibly could draw some
bright lines. Um um YOU know, in, for example,
you could say, well, in the limit that the
random fluctuations disappear on the inside, that might be
a bright line between things that are biotic and
not biotic. Um That's not to say that, you
know, so a virus would certainly be biotic. Um
It would have, it would have recognizable um states
and trajectories and character and it would have this
solo aspect. It will, it will have a life
cycle, it will, you know, survive in a particular
eco niche. So usually intracellular one. BUT you wouldn't
necessarily say it was living. So you ask, well,
what does it have to, what does it mean
to, to, to, to, to live? Um um AND
in particular, what does it mean to, I, I
think be um to be an agent in, in,
in a sort of, in the sense that um
there is that kind of anthropomorphic agency and autonomy,
autonomy. And I think that the bright line there
is that the um the system can be described
as if it has a garr model of the
consequences of its own active states. I think that
is a, that possibly is a bright line that,
that helps basically give you an ontology of different
kinds of things. Um And, you know, if you've
got, if so, I'm now appealing to you, if
you recall at the beginning, I was setting up
the notion of a model as foundational. Um So
the jar model is just basically a description of
a pro description of the characteristic states of the
thing in question. Um And if you, if your
generative model is such that it includes uh paths
into the future and because the future is caused
because of the circular, circular causality you mentioned before,
which is acting upon the world, then implicitly, you've
got a generative model or at least your internal
dynamics can be described as having an internal model
of the consequences of your action in the future.
And at that point, I think you are starting
to talk about minimal agency, not minimal self hood.
This kind of system doesn't know it's an agent,
but it now has a minimal kind of agency
in the sense it represents the consequences of its
actions and can be understood or read as selecting
among a number of different actions. And choosing the
one that is most probable for that kind of
thing, that kind of thing that it is. So,
yeah, I think I'm not quite sure what a
virus would, um, the virus would not plan. Um
So it's certainly biotic. Is it an agent? Is
a thermostat agent? Um You know, probably not.
So earlier, we've talked about the need to reduce
prediction errors. And in your work, you talk about
existential imperative. So what is an existential imperative in
this particular context? What does that mean?
Um It's just another way of um putting a
teleology, a theological understanding or description on the physics
backstory. So um in the same way that you
can describe the behavior of anything in terms of
self evidencing which we rehearsed in terms of gathering
evidence from my model of the world, um existential
imperatives are what it would look like to be
something. So the free energy principle actually turns this
on its head and says, if you exist in
the sense of possessing a markoff blanket which itself
implies or entails a set of attracting or characteristic
states, that is the gerit model that is the
pullback attractor when described um oh sorry, that is
the pullback attract tractor that when described probabilistically is
the gerit model. That means if you exist, you
will um look as if you are conforming to
certain imperatives, namely minimizing your prediction error or your
free energy. So this the minimization of free energy
is a consequence of existing I exist. Therefore, I
can be described as thinking and inferring and perceiving
and acting. Um But you can sort of turn
that on its head and say if you wanted
to, you are licensed to tell a much more
theological function story now to exist. I must infer
I must perceive and act. I must have a
generative model of my lived world in order to
act sensibly in that world. So that's the um
the genesis of the existential imperative that if I
do not uh minimize my free energy, then I
cannot exist. It's a slight of hand, it's, it's,
it's slightly cheeky because the physics. So the other
way around the physics says that if you exist,
um then you can always be described as minimizing
uh of conforming to the looking as if you
are minimizing your free energy. So that means you
can be described as if you like optimizing something
extremis something complying with a principle of least action
which means that you can, it looks as if
you are complying with it to minimize um you
know, to minimize your free energy. Uh JU just
for um people who are not familiar with the
principle of least action action here um as in
um is read as time times free energy. Um
So it's, it's, it's uh technically, it's the area
under the curve as you move forward in time.
But the ba mechanics just is a principle of
least action in exactly the same way that Hamilton's
principle of least action just describes the motion of
massive bodies. All we're doing here is describing the
motion or the dynamics of internal states in terms
of them holding beliefs about external states and then
acting upon. It's the exactly the same kind of
maths. Mhm.
So I would like to get now a little
bit more into nervous systems and the brain. But
there's another concept that you touched on briefly earlier
that I think it's important for you to explain
a bit better just for people to understand what
we're going to talk about here. So what is
self-organization and specifically biological self-organization?
Well, self organization um is a term U usually
used um by um physicists to describe um uh
how systems, how the dynamics of systems bring about
particular states. Um And it's effectively what we have
just been talking about. I mean, I've slipped in
some technical words like pullback tractors. Um um So
you want to understand the physics or more specifically
the mechanics um behind um the uh propensity or
the existence of certain systems that seem to be
drawn to, you know, to certain attracting states. So
the simplest example of that is uh equilibrium physics,
you know, why is it that things cool down,
you know, why is it that you can um
why do we have the second law? Um YOU
know, what, why do things settle to a free
energy minimum when isolated from the world, when, when
they, when they're closed systems. So the physics of
closed systems is just a way of writing down
the physics or the laws, literally, you know, the
equations of motion of states that describe the behavior
of things that are isolated and they just settle
down to the, the lowest energy point. Um uh
One when one moves um to systems that are
now open, that also now induces the circular causality
you're picking up on before. Then one now moves
to self-organization the context of non equilibrium. So non
equilibrium physics because there are no equilibria anymore because,
you know, because of this circular causality and then
one, what, what one is aspiring to understand is
the um the ability or the existence of certain
systems that have um what can be described as
a non equilibrium steady state, which is just a
way of saying that, you know, if I wait
long enough, um my system will confine itself to
a set of characteristic states. Um And it will
never leave those states. So do so just, you
know, probabilistically or um um very sporadically, that's the
attracting set, that's the pullback attractor. So you want
to understand how do things converge upon their, their
attracting uh states, their characteristic states and characteristic states
here is just a euphemism for um being a
member of this attracting set that is characteristic of
me. And you can actually score it with a
characteristic function. The characteristic function is one if, if
uh I'm in one of my characteristic states and
zero, if I'm not, if I'm, you know, long
temperature or um in two pieces or um or
anything else that would be inconsistent um and violate
those existential imperatives. So, self-organization, you know, it is
an umbrella term to, that starts to get really
um interesting certainly in physics, when you're talking about
non uh non equilibria and open systems,
and how does it apply specifically in the case
of nervous systems? What does it mean for a
nervous system to be self organizing?
Well, self-organization, strictly speaking, um can be applied to
any system that possesses this characteristic based. But of
course, the most interesting for people like you and
me is, is is the nervous system. Um BUT
you know, the principles should be exactly the same.
Um So the self-organization um um usually um is
manifest at a number of different scales. Um And
at each scale, you're basically looking for an explanation
which um from the point of view of the
Free engine principle is a minimization of free energy,
but at different scales. So at a very fast
scale, well, actually, now let's start off with a
very large uh large scales and then sort of
winnow down. So at the, you know, at an
evolutionary timescale, we are now looking for processes, self-organizing
processes uh where the where speciation is you know,
uh a self organizing uh phenomena at the level
of evolution itself. Um AND you know, things like
adaptive fitness and indeed, the definition of the species
entails a persistence over time with characteristic states, characteristic
pheno states. So what kind of basing mechanics would
you be looking at if you were applying the
free energy principle? Well, you'd be looking at those
free energy minimizing processes that have this uh notion
of selecting the good phenotypes that are a good
match minimum prediction error with their environment. Um In
statistics, this is known as Bayesian model selection. So
selecting a number of different generative models, which we
can now read as the phenotype. So, before I
am my genitive model, I am seeking evidence from
my own existence because I am seeking evidence from
my model and I am my model. So now
I can label each phenotype each uh each baby
um uh uh um as a model and I
can score the adaptive fitness of that model in
terms of um that baby's um well, that over
the lifetime, um we can take the uh the
free energy over the lifetime or the pathogen or
the free action um and that would be adaptive
fitness. So now we've got be model selection now
is just natural selection. So evolution is nature's way
of doing be model selection to select the free
engine minimizing generative model with her Markov blanket. That
is the phenotype. What does that mean from the
point of view of neurodevelopment at a slightly sort
of faster time scale. Well, it means that the
model that I've inherited from my genotype of my
parents and this basic model selection of, you know,
over millennia means that I can now um learn
my environment quickly and efficiently in an adaptive way
in a free and minimizing way. Also, it means
that my environment is actually built to be learnable.
So the self-organization that you'd expect to see during
um uh neurodevelopment um say development of the brain
in um in utron then crucially during early developmental
periods is basically a um a selection of the
neuronal elements and systems and connectivity. The connectome um
that is fit for purpose to um to provide
a good generative model of this phenotype of this
infant's world where this world is carefully crafted by
the mother by school, you know, by carers um
by teachers to make it as learnable as possible.
And then you'd be asking uh if you're a
neurobiologist, what are the mechanisms of this? Well, there
are all sorts of um um um levels on
which you can study this sort of epigen specification
and of neurodevelopment right through to experience dependent plasticity
where neurons or brain cells that wi together fire
together. This itself is a free energy minimizing process.
It's also known as heavy plasticity and effectively the
the connectivity as it grows. Well, interestingly, in fact,
we're usually born with too many connections. It's a
bit like being a large language model that we
have to actually prove. So it's actually a question
of the right level of sparsity. So we actually
lose redundant connections as we grow up and become
old and wise and sparse in our uh our
much simpler and more efficient uh generative model. But
um irrespective of that, um all of this can
be written down as uh effectively learning in exactly
the same way that machine learning uses recurrent neural
networks to um um identify the the best weights
that the best explain the content to which this
um um recurrent ne network was exposed. Uh For
example, for, you know, for example, a large language
model. So this will be plasticity of a developmental
sort but also experience dependent plasticity um that we
still enjoy today, we, we can still learn to
drive a car when we're quite old or you
can now go off and learn a new sport
or you could run away from fires in a,
in a way that you've never, never done before.
Um So we, you know, we still have this
capacity to learn. Um And we also have the
capacity to revise the very structure of our models
of the kind that is um prescribed epigenetic at
birth. Uh You know, when we go to sleep
at night, for example, you know, we are eliminating
certain synaptic connections that are redundant that have accumulated
through experience dependent during the day. So this is
self organ organization over a timescale of years, developmentally
um days, in terms of the sleep wake cycle
and hours, in terms of learning a new skill,
and then we go to um a faster um
um uh level of um self-organization um which um
would be um framed now, not in terms of
hours, but in terms of milliseconds and seconds. And
this would be the kind of self-organization that would
be appropriate for describing the dynamics, not neuroplasticity, not
the efficacy of the strength of neural connections, but
the actual activity, the neural activity, the dynamics themselves,
the amount to which brain cells are spiking or
shouting or trying to influence each other through message
passing and depolarization events. And this is the inference
part, this is the perception and the active part.
So what is this kind of self organization? Well,
we've just said it's neuronal dynamics that have, that
can be described in terms of space mechanics that
can be read as perception of action, changing your
mind in the moment to predict accommodate and to
realize predictions about the sensorium given the way that
you are sampling your sensorium. And then you get
into the world of cold in neuroscience, even rated
potentials and things that change very, very quickly. So
we've moved away from learning and ethology um into
the world of self-organization over milliseconds. There's an interesting
intermediate scale which I just slip in. Um WHICH
I think makes us um intelligent and, and cognitive,
which is uh being able to recognize the context
um in further context you are in and make
short term adjustments to the connectivity that it has
been learned. Um And this is often framed in
terms of representation of uncertainty or confidence or precision
ascribed to different sources of evidence in psychology. It
would be attention. Um um um So this is
not actually recognizing or inferring the particular content at
the moment or in the future, but the context
in which the ability that your brain has to
recognize you're in the dark and therefore make appropriate
adjustments in terms of pupillary dilatation. Um um um
SORT of, you know, adapt your photoreceptors uh in
a way that knows that there's a different dynamic
range range at hand. So being in the dark
provides a context that outlives in time, the very
fast sense making they get from say visually avert
responses. I mentioned that because that's quite important, attention
is quite important when it comes to talking about
things like sentience and phenomenal experience and possibly mental
action. Because if you've got the ability to recognize
the context in which you are making sense, it
may be that a higher level of the brain
in this deep architecture is able to now act
upon lower levels to say it's in this context,
you're making you're doing your predictive coding or it's
in that context. And now you've got the notion
of action on the inside, not just through moving
your bodies. And that mental action, which I repeat,
it could be just optimizing or seen as optimizing
your intentional set or in the active domain, your
intentional set may be an important if you like
facility that thermostats don't have and possibly insects don't
have it. Certainly, you and I have this sort
of, um, fast but not very fast. Um, SCALE
of self organization, coordinating things in, you know, 300
milliseconds through to several seconds, for example.
Mhm And still on the topic of nervous systems
and the brain more specifically, uh earlier, you mentioned
another concept that I said, I would need to
ask you more about what is hierarchy in this
context. What does it mean for the brain to
be hierarchical?
Right? So again, that's an excellent question. So um
hierarchy um simply means um that there are separable
levels or scales of some thing and implicitly lots
of things because there's things at every scale. Um
So, from the point of view of a physicist,
uh there's another kind of circular causality which you'll
find in um non equilibrium physics. And in particular,
um the uh synergetics of, of the sort that
Herman Hagen is famous for was, was, was famous
for um he unfortunately died very recently. Um So
this circular causality is a circular causality between scales.
And you think of this as a sort of
a hierarchical ladder So the hierarchy very much as
in an organization or in a caste system means
that there is a certain ordering. So you can
be low in the hierarchy or high in the
hierarchy. Um And this hierarchical structure always exists in
the universe. Um SIMPLY because you can take small
fast fluctuations at any given scale and take the
averages of these. And then what happens is that
the fast stuff gets averaged away, you're left with
slightly slower, larger scale things. So you've got a
representation of the fast stuff at the lowest, at
any given level. And then at the higher level
there, um things slow down. There are um they
are if you like um caused by or subtended
by the fasting simply because the fast things are
um uh added together to create the slow things.
So um um but at the same time, the
slow things provide a context for the fast things.
And this is the kind of circular causality um
celebrated in synergetics. And that providing the context means
that you can write down mathematically akin to things
like the center manifold theorem. Um A notion that
the slow things at the higher scale enslave the
fast fluctuations to particular manifolds on which the slow
things operate. Um And, and you repeat that you
can rinse swash and repeat. Now you've got the
slow things that can be averaged to make even
slower things. And if it is a case as
it probably is. Um AND certainly from the point
of view that the energy it is relatively easy
to show it is the case uh if it
is the case that the dynamics, uh the functional
form of the dynamics expressed as a Lagrangian or
in terms of the equations of motion are conserved
over scales with different scaling properties. But you know,
the functional forms the same you have what they
call the renormalization group. So what that means is
that the world out there has this hierarchical structure
where slow things contextualize and enslave fast things and
the fast things effectively um are coarse grained in
order to summarize and create the slow things. So
this is a circular causality that um that emerges
from the slaving principle in physics. Why is that
interesting? Well, remember before, the free energy principle says
that um an existential imperative is to have a
good uh um narrative model of your lived world.
Um And by good, it just basically means that
the probability of the data being provided by of
the sensory input being provided by this world is
very high on your model, which means that you
have to have a good model of the world
because I'm using that expression um with a nod
to an acknowledgment of things like the good regulator
theorem and the law of requisite variety that was
established in the early days of cybernetics. And what
this basically says is that if I am in
an open exchange with my environment. And if I
could control and measure, if I can act upon
and sense my environment um in the language of
the good regulator there, if I can regulate this
environment, then I have to be a good model
of that environment. So this is just another statement
of the free energy principle. In the sense that
um um to be a good model means that
my model evidence is very high. And if I
maximize my model evidence, I'm imply minimizing my surprise
or, or my free energy. Um But we've said
that the world has to have a hierarchical structure,
which means that my brain as a good model
of this world has to have a hierarchical structure.
So, what would that look like? Well, it would
look like um effectively bits of the brain sitting
very close to the sensory input, responding very, very
quickly um to what's going on. And then there
would be a level above it, a level above
another part of the brain, a brain system that's
looking at the level below as if it was
the Sensorium as if it was a sensory interface,
as if it was the Markov blanket. And indeed,
and then you've got a third level or scale
that's looking at the second level. Um And it's
enacting in this um in the spirit of the
renormalization group, it's doing exactly the same thing. In
fact, it's doing predicted coding, which is minimizing free
energy that that is the, the Lagrange in this
instance. Um uh And so that gives you a
view of the, of the brain as basically layer
upon layer, very much like that onion analogy. Uh
We had before where each layer is trying to
make sense of the layer towards the outside, the
lower layer, the layer or the level that is
closer to the fast sensory fluctuations that are provided
by vision or hearing or interception and making sense
of means um being able to predict um um
vertically and simply um um in the, in the
spirit of minimizing or maximizing model evidence or minimizing
um free energy. Um And that basically can always
be read as providing a simple account that is
accurate of what's going on at the level below.
Uh And I use that language because um the
simplicity is important here um in the sense that
the model evidence, the, well, let's put it the
other way, the free energy can always be expressed
as complexity minus accuracy. So if I want to
minimize my free energy or maximize my model evidence
or minimize my prediction error or minimize my surprise,
I'm effectively trying to find the minimally complex explanation
that retains an accurate account. So I'm always trying
to simplify, I'm always trying to compress, I'm always
trying to dimension reduce, I'm always trying to summarize
coarse grain without losing accuracy. So it's lossy compression,
but the least lossy in terms of the amount
of information. So this notion of compression is really
important because this is where um a lot of
people think about um uh the the existential imperatives
can also be seen not as minimizing prediction, but
just by compressing. Uh JUST arac in coarse brain
away what really matters in describing what's really going
on and increasingly longer and larger spatial scales. So
as you send the hierarchy in the brain, as
you move deeper into the brain, in terms of
this anion analogy, then you see more of the
surface. Um So, you know, after a certain uh
uh after a certain depth, there will be brain
systems that are multimodal, they will be receiving say
prediction errors from the visual brain, from the hearing
brain from the intercepted brain from the, you know,
the proceed brain, they will be multimodal, they will
be a modal, they will be domain general. And
furthermore, because this scaling as um as we were
emphasizing when describing the slaving principle, um the the
the compression will be into slower and slower narratives.
So receptive fields inside the visual cortex in the
back of the brain at the very the very
lowest hierarchical level, um the one primary visual cortex,
they just see a very small part of the
visual scene and they, you know, and they respond
to very little transient changes, little bars and you
know, very, very quickly. Um And if you go
right down to the brain stem. You know, you're
talking about very fast processing in less than less
than 100 100 milliseconds. But as you get out,
say to the prefrontal cortex or intermediately parietal cortex,
then things you start to get notions of things
moving visual motion, which means that something has to
move for a period of time before you can
actually estimate, you know how fast this thing is
moving. Is it a bird or is it an
airplane? Meaning that the spatial temporal receptive fields increase
in size crucially in time as well. So you
might argue that when you get to very high
levels, say hippocampus, you've got whole narratives lasting encoding,
you know where I've been and where I'm going,
uh you know, seconds into the future. So this
would be um yeah. So that would be the
implication of having a world which has this renormalized
structure, which it always has to, it has had
different levels of description. Um HOW that hierarchical structure
gets installed into the neur anatomy of a brain
that has this increasingly deep, slow compressed representation of
a narrative self that transcends any given moment. So
there is no present. We are just representing things
that are unfolding very, very, very slowly. So perhaps
language is a good example here, the primary auditory
cortex will be perfectly attuned and respond to a
particular frequency glide. Then there will be sort of
per Aitor cortices that may respond to phones the
the the higher levels that may start responding to
the words and the lexical structure of words, there
will be higher levels that actually look over increasing
numbers uh periods, extended periods of time and start
to look at the, the, the put semantics in
the con of syntax. And then you have higher
levels that have, you know, representing the narrative. And
then the genre of the book say that you're
reading. So each level you're moving up same principles
that play out at different different scales.
So when it comes to studying the brain, we
have different methodologies, different ways we can do it.
Like for example, neuroimaging lesion studies, brain stimulation studies,
animal models and so on. Uh I would like
to start by talking a little bit about neuroimaging
because that's an area where you've done lots of
work. So what can we learn about the brain
by studying it through imaging? What are the limitations
of neuroimaging?
Um Well, neuroimaging read as brain mapping. Um I
think is a way of testing hypotheses about functional
brain architectures. And we've just been, we've spent, you
know, 20 minutes talking about some really important aspects
of, of, of, of functional brain architectures. Um But
as we said, at the beginning, uh I can't
peer beneath your Markov blanket without breaking you. So
if your Markov blanket goes away, you're no longer
you. Um So that, that, that, that presents an
interesting problem if I want to understand how I
work. I can't use my own brain because if
I use my own brain, it, um I will
disturb all the perception and action that underwrites me,
trying to understand and experiment my own. But I
could study your brain. But can I? Well, no,
I can't. Well, perhaps I could study um things
like your brain. Uh Perhaps I could study um
the uh the brain um of uh your um
great grandparents after they died and I could do
some neuron after and dissect dead dead brains. Um
So that would be, you know, if you just
look at the history of neuroscience, it all starts
with dissecting dead ones where the thing doesn't exist
anymore. So its Marko blanket has disappeared and you
can intervene as you look at the structure and
get a lot of insights into the function simply
by looking at the structure. So just discovering hierarchical
organizations, just discovering the preponderance of connections in the
brain. Um So if you just think about that,
that's interesting from the point of view of that
good regulator theorem. I was saying before, if you
were able to dissect the brain, you would be
amazed that nearly all of it is wire, there
are, there's only a very small part of it
mostly on the surface like a cauliflower uh covered
um with the um you know, the cortex, which
literally means that, you know, that which is on
the on the surface which is just a few
millimeters deep. That's where all your brain cells are.
All the rest of it to a certain approximation
uh is just wiring. Um And that wiring is
uh um very sparse uh mediated by axons that
conduct um or have influences over um a whole
range of distances. Um YOU know, uh you know,
up up to several centimeters um in some instances
with a, with a certain fasula and they are
able to conduct with high fidelity and influence other
neurons by being wrapped in myelin, which is a
fatty insulator like a cable. And that fatty substance
looks white. So it's called white matter. So the
cortex is gray matter, the interior, most of the
interior of the collectivity is white matter. That is
interesting because what it means is if you are
AJ model of your world, then your world basically
must be of the sort where there is action
at a distance and it is quite sparse, which
is interesting, isn't it? Because by,
by the way, sorry for interrupting you, what does
the term sparse or sparsity mean in the context
of neuroscience?
Um Well, it's used, I think in the same
context everywhere. It just means that it's, it's it's
um can be used um us refers to um
um distributions. So a very sparse distribution um would
for example be where there are a very, very
small number of big things and a large number,
a very large number of, of, of small things
when used in the context of connectivity, which is
a sense in which we've been using it throughout
this conversation. Um uh Either in terms of coupling
in random dynamic systems and causal inferences or in
terms of brain connections that are if you like
the physical instantiation of those causal causal influences. Um
Then we're talking about uh we can envisage a
matrix, a big square with lots of elements where
there's where there's an entry when one thing is
connected to another thing. So if everything was connected
to everything that matrix would be populated with nonzero
elements everywhere and it would be dense. So it
would be a non sparse matrix. On the other
hand, if everything is just connected to one other
thing, then for every column in that matrix, there
would just be one entry. So although you have
N squared possible connections, there will only be a
small number in that particular simple example, just N
connections. So that's a sparse matrix. So what people
are looking for when they look at connectomes of
connectivity or adjacency matrix in graph theory they're looking
for um or they expect to see um sparse
sparse connections. So of all the possible connectivity, only
a very small number of connections are actually evident
or or present. So the brain um has, you
know, billions of neurons. Um So you can imagine
an enormous big connectivity matrix sometimes calls them called
an adjacency matrix that I'm next to you. If
I'm connected to you, a massive billion times of
billions, billions times billions of potential entries. But the
actual number of connections is a tiny, tiny fraction
of all the possible connections. And that's what people
mean when they say spars, people who are experts
in this field nowadays dubbed connectome say from, in
terms of the connectivity, the brain is almost empty
of all the possible ways it could be, you
know, wires you could have, there's hardly anything there.
And yet, of course, it takes up most of
the uh the wiring at most of the space.
So that's what sparsity means. It's an important point
to pick up on because um you know, again,
this theme that the brain is or entails the
model of the lived world, it means that your
world has very sparse causal structure. And of course,
that's exactly where we started with the definition of
things in terms of Markov blankets. So if I
live in a universe that is constituted by things
that just means I live in a universe with
lots of Markov blankets at a particular scale, if
I live in a universe with lots of markup
blankets at a particular scale, that means it has
to be sparsely coupled. And if my self-organization in
terms of synaptic plasticity is a way of learning
that sparse, you know, where those sparse connections or
couplings are, that means that my brain should have
a sparse connectivity and it does. So that, that,
you know, sorry, we wander away from your question
about brain imaging. But I'm just saying you can
learn a lot about the anatomy. Yeah, just knowing,
just being able to dissect a dead brain, it
tells me a lot about the world that this
brain used to be in and the principles, you
know, and you know, and the scale at which,
you know, this brain was operating and it also
tells you about the different modalities. Then he then,
then he moved to neuropsychology. So, and they, you
know, af after you had all the famous um
natural scientists um doing that section of dead bodies,
then came along the ability to um do um
uh lesion experiments on, you know, on animals, for
example, on electrical stimulation experiments. So there's a lot
of work in the 17th and 18th century um
asking a really simple question is the brain plural
potential in the sense that every capacity, perceptual or
cognitive capacity that we enjoy involves or entails every
neuron in a distributed fashion or are certain parts
of the brain specialized for particular functions. So, you
know, there were sort of uh and this, this
debate raged even into the 20th century in terms
of sort of lash's law of mass action, for
example, you know, if I take a little mouse
brain and I just scoop out a thumbnail or
less, does it matter where I do it in
terms of what function I have now compromised in
this little animal. Um And one could argue no
uh that, that it was a bad argument because
it does matter. But yeah, that was, that was
what people were trying to understand was there. And
this uh you know, became known subsequently as um
the principle of functional specialization or segregation that different
parts of our brain are specialized for modeling different
modalities in different parts of the world. Um AND
different aspects of the world at different temporal scales,
for example. So most of the uh the compelling
work in terms of um lesioning studies, usually um
use certainly with humans. The only lesions that you
could use were those that were um occur naturally
as in terms of strokes, for example, um or
if you were um involved as you know, as
a war medic, you, you had the opportunity to
discover lesions caused by bullets, for example, in say
World War One that became known as neuropsychology. So,
neuropsychology just is uh understanding the deficits that follow
from a lesion to the brain. Um YOU know,
you can then say, well, if I've lost this
function, I have this, you know, by appeal to
this lesion deficit model, if I've lost this function
when I've had a stroke here, whereas I've lost
this function. When I've had a stroke here, you've
got a double dissociation. That's one of the main
workhorses of neuropsychology and that sort of means that
that part of the brain might be specialized for
this kind of function, whereas that might be specialized
for another one. So you are starting to segregate
the functional specialization anatomically. So it's also known as
functional segregation. So functional segregation would be the anatomical
segregation of functionally specialized brain areas. And we're talking
about brain areas that at different scales cover the
entire lobe load that say doing right down to
little thumbnail sized patches of the brain, say B
five also known in animal research as NT have
been specialized for visual motion. So this was uh
this was if you like um the, the whole
set of um really important questions um pertaining to
is the functional specialization is a functional segregation in
the brain. We think there is because you look
at all these beautiful neuropsychology experiments, all these very
fine neur anatomy and tracing studies. Um EVERYTHING points
to functional specialization, but no one knew, no one
knew until brain imaging came along. It's strange. But
before really before the sort of the late eighties,
early nineties, this was just a hypothesis. It was
only when you could actually measure the entire brain
doing one thing that you could say yes, this
part of the brain was involved in visual motion
and it didn't activate anything else. And this part
of the brain was involved in processing visual color
and it's not the visual motion area and it
didn't activate anything else? So it's only when you
were able to do imaging proper by which I,
I'm assuming that your question is about being able
to form pictures of the entire brain natural. Yeah.
Uh So at that point, all of these, um
I mean, unsurprising but, but strictly speaking, all up
until that, up until that time, functional specialization and
segregation and all the theories about uh that intend
in terms of uh functional brain architectures were just
hypotheses. No one actually knew until you could actually
measure the brain responding or executing a particular function
or engage in a particular kind of perception. Uh
um um Until you can actually see that and
see the anatomical segregation in the images that we
knew that was the case. And that having established
the principle of functional specialization or segregation, the next
stage was to turn to the second principle which
was um which is in my word referred to
as the principle of functional integration. So now you've
got this notion, you've got lots of different sort
of centers and anatomically segregated specialized processing brain regions.
Now, you want to know how they talk to
each other, how are the messages passed around? How
does one system influence another or contextualize another? What
is the nature of the distributed processing? And that
really requires you to understand the connectivity. So we
we're back now to the adjacent sea matrices and
the collective and the causal influences of one region
on another region that is going to recapitulate or
install that causal architecture out there. You know that
it matters. You know, when you're speaking that I
can either infer what you are saying through the
movement of your lips, through the visual modality or
through my ears. In terms of the sound waves
that you you produce, there is a common cause
and therefore there has to be part of the
brain in which there is audio visual integration is
mechanistically evinced through connections between or through convergence into
these a modal domain general readers through these hierarchical
structures. So this then became the focus of um
decades of research ongoing uh in brain imaging to
understand the connectivity and the uh and how the
connections um underwrite patterns of activation and systems uh
you know a different scales so that um understanding
the integration of these functionally specialized regions was very
important for me. Um And many people like me.
Um ONE important aspect of functional integration in the
brain was this hierarchical structure. So the very first
paper in cerebral cortex and the first issue was
a very famous Fellow of Vanessen paper just looking
at the connectivity studies usually in primates of post
mortem studies, looking at great detail about the nature
and the lambda specificity of different connections. And they
came up with a wiring diagram that was the
visual hierarchy. And a lot of work since that
time has now been trying to understand the hierarchical
relationship in terms established by the connections by using
brain imaging to measure not just which brain areas
are activated, but can you infer the influence that
this brain area has on this brain area?
Right. And so uh we've been talking a lot
about brain imaging, but are there ways by which
we can integrate the more coarse grained approaches to
the brain with the more fine grained approaches? And
for example, integrates the smaller sort of microscopic aspects
of brain physiology with the more abstract understanding of
the mind, like what we have in psychiatry or
psychology.
Yeah. No, that's an excellent question. Um um And
in essence, yes, you know, there is, you know
that that would be the holy grail of um
um um certainly translational neuroscience in the context of
translating into a clinical context, neurology or or psychiatry
to do that usefully as you intimate, you really
need to link the scales. So sometimes um um
framed in terms of from um from molecules to
behavior. Uh I like from sin, the sentience. Um
So how, how do you bridge that gap? Um
I if you want, if you want my honest
and personal answer, you, you, you need to have
a generative model of the brain. So we've been
talking about the brain as a generative model but
a lot of the maths um behind the the
energy principle that kind that, that description of self
organizing self-organization in the brain inherited from the problem
of actually analyzing brain imaging data and integrating data
at different scales and different modalities. And the secret
behind it is to have a model of how
you think the brain works that can generate predictions
of the data that you would get if you
measured it at this scale versus that scale. So
what normally happens is that people um specialize in
a particular scale. So you can be a molecular
biologist and work with um um um all the
the the delicate and, and sometimes overwhelming plurality of
um of, of different in intercellular mechanisms and biochemical
pathways and or even the genetics and genomics and
all this. Uh SO the whole universe just looking
at not just one cell but even mitochondria within
one cell. You know, there are people who know
more than I could possibly know about the entire
brain, you know, just about the dynamics and the
structure of organelles and, and things like, you know,
I repeat mitochondria in the cell right through to
eho you know, who just look at um uh
stigma, look, look at ant colonies, for example, uh
sort of multiple individuals or psychologists uh um of
a certain b who are, you know, interested in
the social neuroscience. Um So all of these people
work at different scale, but in principle, you should
be able to link the scales. Um And that
means you have to have um you have to
have again, another instance of this sort of hierarchical
scale free modeling, which means you need to have
the right principles. So, you know, just to come
back to where we started, you know, the rates
on debt for the free principles to identify these
scale free principles that you should find operating at
every level so that you can start to link
the levels. So just experimentally, what one is looking
for is at a very, very fine scale to
try and estimate certain dynamics rate constants connectivity structures.
Um IN a way that allows you now to
constrain um estimates um in more elaborate higher scale
models of what's going on. Uh So just to
give you a concrete example, say take psychiatry um
and you're uh predicating your understanding of psychiatry, say
psychosis in terms of a predisposition to hallucinations. And
you can start to look for models psychological models
of hallucinations and do brain scanning when people are
hallucinating versus not hallucinating at a very large scale
level. And then start to say does this kind
of paradigm and the emergent brain activations and effective
connectivity um um matter in terms of uh identifying
people with and without say schizophrenia or some kind
of volcanic psycho syndrome or um um uh snap.
Um
WHAT do you sign up top? Sorry,
a pathology of synapses? So, um um so the
connection, the connectivity we've been talking about is uh
connections between nerve cells or neurons. Those connections come
in many different flavors. And how people argue that,
you know, they are also um non neuron cells
are important in in in message passing and self-organization.
But the primary way in which one nerve cell
or population of nerve cells, neurons talk to another
uh population is through this, these axons, the wires
and these wires basically um impinge upon receptors, dendritic
trees uh of the of the recipient neuron. And
the actual connection is very much like a little
plug and socket. It's called a synapse. So, so
this is a very, very small um um uh
plug and socket um that has an amazing physiology
and, and it can, it can be tuned much
like a transistor or, or uh you know, modern
day implementations of chips and but much more complicated
than you'll find in the computer. Um So that's
the synapse, a pathology of synaptic communications transmission. Um
um IS a synaptophysin transmission. It is the understanding
of the biochemistry, the Nero and the genomics and
the physiology of how one neuron nerve cell talks
to another through these synapses and it can go
wrong in all sorts of ways. So, synaptophysin communication,
if you are machine learning, it would be basically
breaking the connection weights. Um There are lots and
lots of different ways in which it can be
changed. Um USUALLY associated with neurodegenerative conditions. But also
you can generalize the notion that because this synaptic
communication involves, involves neurotransmitters and the neurotransmitters cause their
effects in the post synaptic cell by latching onto
receptors. Those receptors are the targets of drugs. So
nearly all the fact that all the drugs that
we use. Nearly all the drugs that we use
in neurology and psychiatry are those drugs that affect
synaptic transmission. Interestingly not to usually directly cause a
response but to attenuate or augment the impact of
an existing input. So it's like switching again on
the synaptic connections much in the way that we
could imagine increasing the gain on connectivity in the
brain by deploying attention attending over here. As opposed
to over there means that I can use certain
mechanisms, usually neuromodulatory mechanisms to modulate the gain of
the synaptic transmission, sometimes known as post synaptic gain
or sensitivity. Um So, you know, if that those
systems go wrong, then you've got now um a
very small scale and you understand the mechanics because
you've done all the um the neuropharmacology and the
molecular biology. Um um I studied these cells in
context in microcircuits. If you understand that you've now
got a link between the the macro scale belief,
updating that underlies a hallucination and what could possibly
cause the difference in the propensity for illusory or
hallucinatory perception in this group of people versus that
group of people predicated on an understanding of the
mear biology or the drug status of these people
because he started to understand the biophysics of the
message passing that ultimately, that just is the neural
dynamics of the internal states. But because you've now
got a principled account of how the internal dynamics
can manifest in terms of perception. You've now got
an explanation at the level of perception and hallucinations
and belief, updating, and failures of belief, updating like
delusions. Or in fact, if you think about it,
nearly every psychiatric syndrome can be thought of as
some kind of false inference whether it's anorexia, nervosa
and I have I falsely infer that I am
much fatter than I am. So I just morph
a phobia. So it's quite natural. If I, if
I infer and believe that I'm grossly obese, then
it's quite understandable. I'm going to be very resistant
to overeating um through to um you know, um
delusional systems of paranoia. For example, if I, you
know, falsely infer that you have some antagonistic view
or I falsely infer that the TV presenter is
actually talking to me personally, you know, of, you
know, a failure of attribution of uh a failure
of attribution of kind of false inference right through
to um you know, um the kind of the,
you know, the influences that need new learning for
if I, if we lose a loved one in
our lives, you know, the grief reaction requires a
lot of new learning, which um you know, um
means that for a certain amount of time, um
you will be making false influence, I expect, you
know, my daily life to be like this and
the loved one is not there. You know, you
have to completely relearn a new world model or
a new challenge of model where that person is
no longer there that can be very painful. Um
AND involve lots of mistakes and high free energy
which you try to repair by, by learning a
new way. I think, slowly coming to terms with
what with what has happened.
Could that also apply to depression? And in this
case, depression, what would it be like? Would it
be sort of having pessimistic generative models of the
world or something like that?
Yeah, there are lots of interesting counts of depression
under the free energy principle, more particularly sort of
active influence focusing on different aspect of it. You
know, there is an argument that depression is not
false inference in the sense that it is actually
veridical and the very fact that we have depression
after millennia of natural selection means that there must
be something good about, about the ability to be
depressed. Um And of course, you know, if you
read depression in a very simple way as avoidance
behavior that restricts that precludes um putting yourself in
situations where you will be surprised or hurt or
damaged or embarrassed or upset, um in some way,
um then it can be very protective. Um So
it's quite good to be de depressed and withdrawn
in situations where if you didn't withdraw from this
different if you didn't preclude or um um preclude
that interaction, you could actually end up being more
surprised and, and, and um agitated or upset than
if you did the problem with depression. Um IS
when you, when that base optimal um response, active
inference response, um um outlives the circumstances that caused
it. So say I have a bad experience, but,
you know, you can see how the argument could
be extended to all sorts of phobias and obsession
compulsive disorder. But let's just simplicity, say I have
a very bad experience. That means that if I
leave my house, I am going to be very
surprised. I, I um by something awful happening, whether
it's a social, uh socially awful thing or emotionally
aw awful thing or physically awful thing. Um, YOU
know, I'm going to be in excruciating pain or,
um, or feel terrified, uh have a panic attack
if I leave the house. Um This will happen
to me because it happened to me once. Therefore,
this is the kind of thing I don't do
because I don't have panic attacks. And I don't,
you know, I don't, uh um I don't get
upset by uh by, by other people. Um You
know, I have um I have this kind of
self model, therefore, it's highly unlikely that something like
me will leave the house. So I end up
socially withdrawn. Uh I avoid social media, for example,
you know, um and that can be very functional
if you have, if it's actually quite dangerous out
there, but now say the world changes and all
your friends are missing you and they don't know
where you are, but you don't have the opportunity
to revise your prior beliefs that if I go
outside, I'm going to get hurt simply because your
behavior has prevented you from self evidencing from gathering
evidence to revise your self model or your model
of the consequences of your behavior. So there are
some certain pernicious responses, active um inference that mean
you can never get out of that behavior because
you're not exploring, you're not always seeking evidence for
this way of being and that way of being.
So this is sometimes framed in terms of literally
getting stuck in a rut because you can't get
out of the rut, you can't get out of
the valley because you've got no evidence that's going
to cause prediction errors to drive you to change
your mind. So what you need to do in
these situations such as depression is to basically um
make the sides of the valley shallower to allow
people to escape again and to, to, to allow
the prediction errors to uh you know, drive to,
to seek out information um to um um resolve
uncertainty to where uncertainty is expected, surprise and expected
free energy. And to do that, you can do,
you can do it in one of two ways.
You can either create an environment where the patient
feels safe so that they can explore different ways
of interacting and you'd be thinking about. So di
um um either cognitive behavioral therapy or, or psychotherapy,
talking therapy and psychoanalysis um with uh or you
can think about doing it chemically if you understand
the men, if you understand um how we encode
the precision, the conviction, the depth of our, you
know, I'm stuck in this flat and I've got
no latitude to move. So you've got very, very
precise beliefs that are holding you in place. Do
you understand what neurochemically and biophysical is representing that
particular belief? Which is, this is about the, about
the precision of your conviction that this is the
way I behave. And then you can actually give
drugs to try and relax that to try and
uh um relax the constraints. So people can start
to explore other ways. Uh You know, so you
can understand a lot of uh pharmacotherapy uh in
terms of the uh uh retuning um the encoding
of uncertainty or precision, which is if you remember
that sort of slow but not very fast sort
of thing between inference and learning. So this is
the contextual inference. This is the attention, this is
the, you know, the way that we encode uncertainty
in the brain. Um And if, if surprise expected,
surprise is uncertainty, which it is self information is
expected. Self information, average self information is entropy. Um
PUT in layman's language or the vernacular would basically
the surprise I expect is uh uh is uncertainty
then I'm in the, you know, I am always
in the game of reducing uncertainty under the free
energy principle, reducing expected surprise. But to do that,
I've also got to recognize my level of uncertainty,
my level of surprise or average surprise, which brings
us back to this sort of crucial um um
ability to recognize the context in terms of how
confident I am in my beliefs. And that relates
to microscopic on the molecular level, to synaptic fish
p the same post synaptic gain and all the
neuromodulation that we've been talking about.
Mhm So, Doctor Frieden, I would really love to
get into other topics like for example, the application
of active influence to explaining or understanding certain social
phenomena like social conformity. And then I would like
to ask you about culture, but I, I'm just
seeing that we've already done two hours. So do
you think it would be better for us to
uh do it? Uh Again, another time,
I would be very happy to come back and
do all those, we have to come back a
few times to do to do all that.
Yeah, because if we get, if we get into
the topic of social expectations, culture and all of
that, we will be here for another two hours.
Probably. Yes, if not longer. Now, I I now
I now need to go neuromodulation and have a
nice cigarette and a cup of coffee to think
about what we've been talking about.
Great. So, just before we finish this interview, are
there any places on the internet where people can
find your work?
Uh Yes, there are. Uh I mean, it's not
really my work. I mean, the, the active influence
is now, you know, growing well beyond, um, even
that, which I know about. Um, SO there, there's
a, a large literature in all of the fields
that we've, we've spoke about. So I think you
just, you know, Google, active infants and um but
specifically that there um there's something called the Active
Inference Institute. Um The um um and it's based
in California and it's, it, it, it, it provides
an excellent resource of teaching materials and possible live
streams and mentorship uh for people who are interested
in sharing ideas or just learning about how, you
know, um um active influence in its various um
various fields of application. There's also international workshops where
the community gets together and um tells each other,
tell each other what what's happening and what's exciting
in the field. Uh So uh active Inference Institute,
but otherwise you're just looking at the theoretical neuro
literature in the field in the field of your,
your inquiry don't necessarily look for my name. As
I say, it's, it's go, it's gone, it's gone
past me. I'm now an admiring spectator of uh
on the applications.
Great. So look this has been a really fascinating
conversation. We've covered a lot of ground when it
comes to the free energy principle nervous systems, active
influence. So I'm very much looking forward to our
next talk. Excellent. I look forward to that.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear, no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mar Nevs calling Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her ma
J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K
Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S friends, David
Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavla Stassi Na
me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Bela Gil Cortez Solis Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa
Anton Erickson. Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fists Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon, Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas, Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica
Week, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George
Katis Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Van Goler Alexander, Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers, these our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik,
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman,
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and
Rosie. Thank you for all.